Distributed processing 
Can you distribute Weka jobs over several machines?
This week's Big Question!
4.1
Can you distribute Weka jobs over several machines?
article
What is Distributed Weka?
Distributed Weka is a plugin that runs Weka on a cluster of machines. It uses the “map-reduce” framework, and operates with both Spark (used here) and Hadoop.
4.2
What is distributed Weka?
video (06:04)
4.3
The "map-reduce" framework
discussion
4.4
Learning about Spark and Hadoop 
quiz
Distributing Knowledge flows
The main way to interact with Distributed Weka is through the Knowledge Flow environment. Processing components are chained together so that one will not execute until the previous one has completed. 
4.5
Installing with Apache Spark
video (12:14)
4.6
ARFF headers for Spark processing 
quiz
Using Naive Bayes and JRip 
We show an example knowledge flow to train and save two classifiers. Naive Bayes yields a single Naive Bayes model. JRip yields multiple JRip models that are combined using a Vote ensemble learner.
4.7
Using Naive Bayes and JRip
video (12:05)
4.8
Training classifiers with Spark 
quiz
Map tasks and Reduce tasks
Map tasks produce models and a Reduce task aggregates them. For Naïve Bayes this involves adding together the statistics. Other model types (trees, rules) use a voted ensemble. Cross-validation uses a Reduce task for each fold.
4.9
Map tasks and Reduce tasks
video (11:36)
4.10
Cross-validating classifiers with Spark 
quiz
4.11
Random Forest performance
article
Miscellaneous Distributed Weka capabilities 
We show how to compute a correlation matrix in Distributed Weka and use it as input to Principal Component Analysis. We also show a parallel implementation of k-means clustering.
4.12
Miscellaneous Distributed Weka capabilities
video (08:38)
4.13
Playing with template flows
quiz
Image classification
With appropriate features, machine learning can be used to classify images. Image features are statistics that describe an image, and can be extracted using a Weka package.
4.14
Image classification
video (07:32)
4.15
Processing images with different feature sets 
quiz
4.16
Reflect on this week’s Big Question
discussion
4.17
Index
article
