Putting it all together
What else is there to know?
This week's Big Question!
5.1
What else is there to know?
article
The data mining process
Producing classifiers is just a small part of the overall data mining process – perhaps the easiest part! Other parts involve formulating the question, gathering data, cleaning it, defining new features, and deploying the result.
5.2
The data mining process
video (06:22)
5.3
Outliers
quiz
Pitfalls and pratfalls
Be skeptical, and particularly wary of overfitting. Missing values can signify various things; classifiers treat them differently. There’s no single "best learner"; all methods have biases. Data mining is an experimental science!
5.4
Pitfalls and pratfalls
video (09:13)
5.5
Missing values
quiz
Data mining and ethics
It’s far harder to anonymize data than you think! The purpose of data mining is to discriminate, but some kinds of discrimination are unethical, and illegal. Data mining discovers correlations, but these do not imply causation.
5.6
Data mining and ethics
video (06:40)
5.7
Correlation, causation, and reidentification
quiz
There's no magic in data mining
There’s no magic in data mining! – in fact, perhaps Weka makes things too easy. You’ve learned lots, but don’t be smug: this course has missed out plenty. And you've learned a powerful technology: please use it wisely.
5.8
Summary
video (06:04)
5.9
What classifiers do
quiz
5.10
Reflect on this week's Big Question
discussion
Farewell
It's time to say goodbye. 
5.11
Post-course assessment
test
This is a test step, it helps you verify your understanding. If you want to earn a Certificate of Achievement on this course you need to complete this test and any others, scoring an average of 70% or above.
To take tests you need to upgrade this course.  It costs $94, which also gets you:
Unlimited access to the course for as long as it exists on FutureLearn, so you can learn at your own pace
A Certificate of Achievement when you’re eligible, to prove what you’ve learned
Upgrade
Find out more
5.12
Farewell
article
5.13
Index
article
